A robust deep learning model for underwater acoustic multi-target 
recognition under non-target interference conditions
Lu Chen
 , Xinwei Luo *
 , Hanlu Zhou
 , Qifan Shen
 , Long Chen
 , Chuanming Huan
Key Laboratory of Underwater Acoustic Signal Processing (Southeast University), Ministry of Education, Nanjing 210096, China
ARTICLE INFO
Keywords:
UAMTR
Non-target interference
TIR
Channel attention mechanism
Deep learning
ABSTRACT
Recognizing multiple underwater acoustic targets from mixed ship-radiated noise is challenging, particularly 
under non-target interference conditions, where complex interference from multiple vessels is common in real- 
world scenarios. However, most existing studies focus on single-target recognition and have overlooked the task 
of recognizing both the types and numbers of targets from such complex mixed signals. To simulate real and ideal 
situations, this paper first constructs three underwater acoustic multi-target datasets (MTDs) with different 
target-to-interference ratio (TIR) ranges based on the ShipsEar dataset. In addition, this study proposes two novel 
dataset resampling strategies that effectively improve the dataset balance level. Furthermore, this paper in-
troduces a deep learning model based on ResNet and channel attention mechanism to perform underwater 
acoustic multi-target recognition (UAMTR) under non-target interference conditions. The channel attention 
mechanism is effective in filtering channel information within feature maps, amplifying informative features 
while reducing noise interference. Experimental results demonstrate that the channel attention module could 
improve global recognition accuracy by up to 4 percentage points. The proposed method achieves a global 
recognition accuracy of 91.21% on the MTD where the energy of each target and non-target signal is equal.
1. Introduction
Passive underwater acoustic target recognition based on ship- 
radiated noise finds broad applications in maritime security, marine 
environmental conservation, as well as marine resource exploration and 
management (Neupane & Seok, 2020). During passive underwater 
acoustic signal acquisition, multiple vessels often appear simultaneously 
in the monitoring area. As a result, underwater acoustic signals contain 
multiple target signals due to overlapping transmissions, along with 
potential interference from non-target sources. In this paper, target 
signals refer to the signals from vessels of interest, while non-target 
interference signals are those from vessels of no interest. To simulate 
realistic acoustic environments, we create mixed signals by combining 
target signals with non-target interference at varying target-to- 
interference ratios (TIRs). TIR represents the ratio of target signal en-
ergy to interference energy for single-target cases and the energy of each 
target relative to interference energy in multi-target scenarios. These 
mixed signals reflect complex and overlapping acoustic conditions 
commonly encountered in real-world underwater scenarios. The 
interference from non-target signals presents a significant challenge for 
underwater acoustic target recognition.
One major challenge of underwater acoustic multi-target recognition 
(UAMTR) under non-target interference conditions lies in the fact that 
such interference signals can diminish or even mask the crucial features 
of target signals. Additionally, non-target interference introduces addi-
tional features, further complicating feature extraction and recognition 
of underwater acoustic targets. Under these interference scenarios, 
conventional signal processing techniques face difficulties in effectively 
separating targets from non-targets within mixed signals. Consequently, 
accurately recognizing both the type and quantity of targets becomes 
even more difficult.
With the advancement of deep learning (DL) technologies, DL-based 
underwater acoustic target recognition methods have gained wide-
spread adoption (Aslam et al., 2024; S. Feng et al., 2024; Khishe, Jav-
danfar, et al., 2023). DL models automatically extract target features to 
accomplish tasks such as underwater acoustic target recognition and 
detection (Bianco et al., 2019; Tang et al., 2025). This end-to-end 
strategy avoids complex feature engineering and serves as an effective 
* Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: 230228256@seu.edu.cn (L. Chen), luoxinwei@seu.edu.cn (X. Luo), 230218633@seu.edu.cn (H. Zhou), 230239392@seu.edu.cn (Q. Shen), 
230248097@seu.edu.cn (L. Chen), 230249577@seu.edu.cn (C. Huan). 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Expert Systems With Applications
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/eswa
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2025.129122
Received 13 May 2025; Received in revised form 10 July 2025; Accepted 19 July 2025  
Expert Systems With Applications 296 (2026) 129122 
Available online 24 July 2025 
0957-4174/© 2025 Elsevier Ltd. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 

solution for addressing the challenge of UAMTR under non-target 
interference conditions. This study constructed a DL model combining 
ResNet (He et al., 2016) and the channel attention mechanism (Hu et al., 
2018) to directly recognize the type and quantity of targets from mixed 
underwater acoustic signals containing interference. The channel 
attention mechanism enhances information selection by weighting 
feature map channels, thereby aiding in the suppression of non-target 
interference.
Another major challenge in advancing UAMTR under interference 
conditions is the absence of dedicated benchmark datasets. To address 
this issue, this study developed three underwater acoustic multi-target 
datasets (MTDs) with different target-to-interference ratio (TIR) 
ranges: SE_raw, SE_norm, and SE_en0. These MTDs were created by 
mixing raw, maximum-normalized, and energy-normalized signals 
derived from the multi-classification dataset ShipsEar (Santos-Domí-
nguez et al., 2016). Specifically, SE_raw and SE_norm retain realistic TIR 
distributions to emulate practical scenarios, whereas SE_en0 establishes 
balanced energy conditions to access model performance under ideal 
settings. Section 3.1 provides a detailed description of the MTD con-
struction process. This work utilizes these MTDs to systematically 
investigate the impact of varying non-target interference levels and 
mixed target counts on target recognition accuracy in Section 5.
Furthermore, this study analyzes the balance levels and mixed-signal 
TIRs of the MTDs to evaluate their properties and validity. Existing 
evaluation frameworks (Charte et al., 2015) primarily focus on the 
balance among target classes but overlook the inter-class balance within 
mixed signals. To bridge this gap, this research proposes two novel 
sample-based balance metrics for MTD assessment. The findings reveal 
that the current MTDs suffer from notable class imbalance due to limited 
data samples in ShipsEar. Such imbalance negatively impacts target 
recognition accuracy. To mitigate this issue, we introduce two dataset 
resampling strategies to enhance the dataset balance. Experimental re-
sults verify that these resampling approaches improve target recognition 
performance.
This study aims to recognize the types and quantity of targets within 
mixed signals containing non-target interference. Based on multi-label 
classification principles, the approaches to address this problem 
include two main strategies: problem transformation methods and al-
gorithm adaptation techniques (M.-L. Zhang & Zhou, 2014).
Problem transformation methods handle multi-label classification by 
converting it into multi-class or multiple binary classification tasks. The 
multi-classification strategy assigns each label to a distinct class but fails 
to capture inter-label dependencies across samples. The binary classifi-
cation approach involves building separate classifiers for each target 
while preserving label correlations through association-based classifiers 
(Duan et al., 2024). Algorithm adaptation methods, on the other hand, 
modify classifiers to predict multiple target categories simultaneously. 
These methods are typically grounded in statistical learning models 
(Law & Ghosh, 2022; H. Liu et al., 2016; Wu et al., 2020), such as K- 
Nearest Neighbors (KNN), Decision Trees (DT), and Support Vector 
Machines (SVM).
However, these traditional methods often rely on hand-crafted fea-
tures and are limited in their ability to model complex, non-linear re-
lationships in high-dimensional data. Their performance tends to 
degrade under conditions with overlapping signals or strong non-target 
interference, which are common in real-world underwater acoustic 
scenarios. Moreover, they are not inherently designed for end-to-end 
training or large-scale data integration.
To address these limitations, our work reformulates the task of 
UAMTR under non-target interference conditions into a multi-label bi-
nary classification problem (M.-L. Zhang & Zhou, 2014), where each 
sample can be associated with multiple target classes simultaneously, 
and each class is treated as a separate binary decision. This trans-
formation captures target label relationships and facilitates the design of 
an end-to-end DL-based recognition model. The length of the label 
vector for each sample matches the total number of target classes L in the 
dataset. Each position in the vector corresponds to a specific target class. 
A value of 1 indicates the presence of that class in the sample, while a 
value of 0 indicates its absence. However, multi-label binary classifica-
tion tasks often suffer from class imbalance, which may lead the model 
to ignore underrepresented classes. We address this issue through two 
novel resampling strategies, as detailed in Section 3.2. Additionally, we 
integrate a channel attention mechanism that enables the model to focus 
on class-relevant features while suppressing interference, thus 
improving robustness and accuracy in challenging acoustic 
environments.
A schematic of the DL-based UAMTR workflow is represented in 
Fig. 1. The main contributions of this paper are as follows: 
(1) A robust DL model based on ResNet and channel attention 
mechanism is proposed to solve the UAMTR problem under non- 
target interference conditions.
(2) The channel attention mechanism is specifically integrated to 
enhance feature extraction and reduce non-target interference 
effects on recognition accuracy.
(3) Three underwater acoustic MTDs with varying TIRs are con-
structed to systematically evaluate the effects of interference in-
tensity and the number of mixed targets on recognition 
performance.
(4) Novel evaluation metrics are introduced to verify the rationality 
and effectiveness of the constructed MTDs.
(5) Two innovative dataset resampling techniques are introduced to 
optimize the dataset balance level and further enhance recogni-
tion performance.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: Section 2 re-
views related work; Section 3 details the methodology for constructing 
MTDs, examines their characteristics, and introduces two novel dataset 
resampling strategies; Section 4 describes the UAMTR model; Section 5
outlines the experimental setup and discusses the recognition results; 
and Section 6 concludes the paper.
2. Related work
2.1. Dl-based underwater acoustic target recognition
The rapid advancement of machine learning and the constraints of 
traditional signal processing techniques in underwater acoustic envi-
ronments have led to increasing interest in leveraging machine learning 
approaches for underwater acoustic target recognition. DL methods are 
highly effective in extracting deep feature representations from under-
water acoustic signals and predicting the labels of unseen samples based 
on learned patterns. DL-based underwater acoustic target recognition 
primarily focuses on feature extraction and algorithm development.
Before the advent of deep learning models in underwater acoustic 
target recognition, traditional signal processing methods had played a 
fundamental role in this field for decades. Common techniques include 
Faster Fourier Transform (FFT), Short-Time Fourier Transform (STFT), 
and Wavelet Transform for time–frequency analysis, which are widely 
used to reveal the spectral characteristics of underwater signals (Lin 
et al., 2024; Xie et al., 2022). Cepstral analysis methods, such as Mel- 
frequency cepstral coefficients (MFCC) (Davis & Mermelstein, 1980; 
Ke et al., 2018) and Gammatone frequency cepstral coefficients (GFCC) 
(Lian et al., 2017), are also frequently adopted to capture spectral en-
velope features. In addition, statistical feature extraction approach-
es—such as zero-crossing rate, energy, spectral centroid, skewness, and 
entropy—have been applied to characterize signal properties (Jiang 
et al., 2021). Advanced techniques such as Empirical Mode Decompo-
sition (EMD) and Cyclostationary Analysis (CTAS) have also been 
explored for their capability to extract nonlinear and periodic features 
from underwater acoustic signals under noisy conditions (Filho et al., 
2022; Rajan et al., 2016). Despite their effectiveness in some scenarios, 
L. Chen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Expert Systems With Applications 296 (2026) 129122 
2 

these traditional methods heavily rely on manual feature engineering 
and expert knowledge, and they often struggle to effectively handle 
highly complex, non-stationary, or overlapping acoustic signals in 
challenging underwater environments.
DL-based underwater acoustic target recognition typically converts 
time-domain signals into spectral representations. This process assists in 
noise suppression, enhances model robustness, and reduces computa-
tional costs. The widely employed spectral features include low- 
frequency analysis and recording (LOFAR) spectrogram (Aghdam 
et al., 2023; P. Wang & Peng, 2020), detection of envelope modulation 
on noise (DEMON) spectrum (Xie, Zhang, et al., 2024), Mel-frequency 
spectrogram (F. Liu et al., 2021), MFCC (Alouani et al., 2022; Khishe 
et al., 2021; Ma et al., 2022), GFCC (H. Feng et al., 2024), and wavelet 
transforms (Qiao et al., 2021) features. Additionally, numerous studies 
have explored various features of underwater acoustic signals to 
improve target recognition (Chu et al., 2025; Yang et al., 2024). For 
instance, Jia et al. (2022) introduced a deep wavelet autoencoder for 
underwater acoustic feature extraction and target recognition. Experi-
mental results show that the proposed method has better recognition 
results than baselines. Barros & Ebecken (2022) employed CTAS to 
classify vessels based on the second-order cyclostationary properties of 
ship-radiated noise (Fırat & Akgül, 2018). CTAS features exhibit high 
noise resistance, preserving spectral correlations even under low signal- 
to-noise ratio conditions. To better represent underwater acoustic tar-
gets and integrate complementary features, Hong et al. (2021) fused 
Mel-frequency spectrogram, MFCC, and CCTZ (Chroma, Contrast, Ton-
netz, and Zero-cross) features for target recognition. Jiang et al. (2021)
extracted features such as zero-cross rate, MFCC, centroid, skewness, 
entropy, and sharpness to characterize acoustic signals. Experimental 
findings confirmed the effectiveness of these interpretable features. X. 
Wang et al. (2022) proposed a self-supervised acoustic representation 
learning method using an acoustic-embedding memory unit-modified 
space autoencoder (ASAE). This approach achieved higher recognition 
accuracy and robustness compared to traditional feature-based 
methods. For signals with low signal-to-noise ratios, researchers typi-
cally employ denoising and signal enhancement techniques to improve 
target recognition performance (Li et al., 2024).
Multi-Layer Perception (MLP) neural networks (Khishe & Mosavi, 
2020), Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) (Barros & Ebecken, 
2022; Chen et al., 2021; Hong et al., 2021; Khishe, Mohammadi, et al., 
2023; Maryam et al., 2022; Xie, Ren, et al., 2024), Recurrent Neural 
Networks (RNNs) (Chen et al., 2022), and attention mechanisms (S. 
Feng & Zhu, 2022; J. Wang et al., 2025; Xu et al., 2025) are widely 
utilized DL models for underwater acoustic signal processing. Alouani 
et al. (2022) employed a ConvLSTM model (Shi et al., 2015), which 
integrates CNN and LSTM, to capture spatiotemporal features for target 
recognition. Jin & Zeng (2023) combined CNN with attention mecha-
nisms to enhance underwater acoustic target recognition accuracy. F. 
Liu et al. (2021) applied the SpecAugment method (Park et al., 2019) for 
data augmentation to address data sparsity issues and applied a con-
volutional recurrent neural network (CRNN) for target recognition. To 
tackle the data imbalance problem, Ma et al. (2022) proposed a trigo-
nometric cos(x) weighted cross-entropy loss function (CFWCEL) derived 
from the predicted probability of each sample. CFWCEL adjusts the 
conventional cross-entropy loss by incorporating a factor that acceler-
ates the reduction of loss for negative instances while slowing it for 
positive instances, thereby improving convergence under imbalanced 
data conditions. They further utilized a multi-scale residual convolu-
tional neural network with an embedded attention mechanism (MR- 
CNN-A) for underwater acoustic target recognition, where the attention 
module aids in noise suppression.
Most existing studies on underwater acoustic target recognition 
concentrate on single-target scenarios, where each acoustic sample 
contains a single signal from only one individual source. However, real 
environments typically present more complex challenges, with over-
lapping acoustic signatures from multiple targets frequently occurring in 
data acquisition. Despite its practical significance, research on UAMTR 
remains underdeveloped relative to single-target methods. Sun & Wang 
(2022) proposed a CNN-based UAMTR framework utilizing single- 
channel signals, formulating the recognition task as a dual classifica-
tion scheme: they transformed cases involving either single same-class 
targets or multiple same-class targets into multi-label binary and 
multi-label multi-value classification problems, enabling end-to-end 
processing through a DL framework. X. Wang et al. (2023) employed a 
hierarchical recognition strategy, implementing a two-stage recognition 
process that first discriminates target signals from non-target interfer-
ence before proceeding to target classification. M. Zhu et al. (2023)
further contributed to the field by developing an innovative hybrid 
model integrating DesNet, LSTM, and attention mechanism, specifically 
designed for dual-class mixed signal recognition.
Acoustic signals generally consist of both target signals and non- 
target interference components due to the inherent complexity of 
Fig. 1. Overview of DL-based UAMTR Under Interference.
L. Chen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Expert Systems With Applications 296 (2026) 129122 
3 

marine environments. Existing methods primarily emphasize feature 
extraction and target recognition while largely neglecting the crucial 
issue of non-target interference suppression. This gap represents a sig-
nificant limitation in current research, as non-target interference signals 
can severely degrade recognition accuracy and system reliability in real- 
world applications.
2.2. Multi-label classification methods
This study tackled the UAMTR task using DL-based multi-label 
classification solutions. Approaches for multi-label classification are 
generally classified into two categories: problem transformation and 
algorithm adaptation (Sorower, 2010; M.-L. Zhang & Zhou, 2014).
Problem transformation methods in multi-label classification refor-
mulate tasks into multi-class or multiple binary classification problems 
using various label encodings (Clare & King, 2001). However, directly 
transforming a multi-label task into these forms overlooks label de-
pendencies. While these methods are straightforward and computa-
tionally efficient, they may not achieve optimal effectiveness. Second- 
order strategies address multi-label tasks by incorporating pairwise re-
lationships between labels, such as ranking relevant versus irrelevant 
labels (Elisseeff & Weston, 2001; Fürnkranz et al., 2008) or modeling 
interactions between label pairs (Guo & Schuurmans, 2011; S. Zhu et al., 
2005). These approaches leverage label dependencies to some extent. 
However, in certain practical scenarios, label dependencies can exceed 
the limitations of second-order assumptions. In contrast, higher-order 
strategies tackle multi-label tasks by capturing higher-order relation-
ships between labels (Cheng & Hüllermeier, 2009; Ji et al., 2008; Read 
et al., 2011). These methods provide more powerful correlation 
modeling than first- and second-order approaches, but often come with 
higher computational demands and reduced scalability.
Algorithmic adaptive methods customize models for multi-label 
learning tasks. Representative approaches include Multi-Label k-near-
est Neighbor (ML_KNN) (H. Liu et al., 2016), derived from the k-nearest 
Neighbor algorithm; Multi-Label Decision Tree (ML-DT) (Law & Ghosh, 
2022), based on decision trees; Ranking Support Vector Machine (Rank- 
SVM) (Wu et al., 2020), build on SVM; and Collective Multi-label Clas-
sifier (CML) (Borchani et al., 2013; Gil-Begue et al., 2021).
ML-KNN predicts labels for new instances based on nearby samples 
in the feature space. It is straightforward to implement but becomes 
computationally intensive for large-scale datasets. Additionally, it is 
vulnerable to the curse of dimensionality in high-dimensional feature 
spaces, which can result in performance deterioration.
ML-DT provides strong interpretability but tends to overfit on high- 
dimensional datasets. Rank-SVM applies the maximum margin principle 
of SVM to rank labels, addressing multi-label classification tasks. It is 
well-suited for problems involving intricate label dependencies but de-
mands precise ranking and careful management of computational cost 
and parameter tuning.
The CML method employs a maximum entropy model to capture 
sample-label associations while accounting for label dependencies. This 
method enhances prediction accuracy but may lead to increased model 
complexity due to excessive constraints, potentially impacting general-
ization performance.
The existence of non-target interference greatly increases the 
complexity of addressing UAMTR. An effective solution must consider 
the dependencies among various target labels and efficiently extract 
meaningful target features from intricate acoustic patterns. This study 
adopts a problem-transformation strategy to tackle these challenges. The 
proposed approach reformulates the recognition task as a multi-label 
binary classification problem (Ridnik, Ben-Baruch, et al., 2021). This 
transformation enables the DL model to predict both the types and 
quantities of targets within the acoustic signals.
3. Underwater acoustic MTDs with non-target interference
3.1. Construction of MTDs
Due to the high cost associated with underwater acoustic signal 
acquisition and the lack of existing MTDs in this domain, this study 
employs the ShipsEar (Santos-Domínguez et al., 2016) dataset to 
develop interfered underwater acoustic MTDs for validating the effec-
tiveness and feasibility of the proposed method. The ShipsEar dataset 
used in our study is collected from real underwater environments and 
has been widely adopted in underwater acoustic target recognition 
research (Fu et al., 2025; S.-Y. Jin et al., 2025). Therefore, it provides a 
certain degree of realism and representativeness. Furthermore, the 
ShipsEar dataset contains signals with varying intensities, which reflect 
not only the differences in the distances between targets and hydro-
phones but also the intrinsic acoustic characteristics of different target 
types. In constructing the synthetic mixtures, we preserved these in-
tensity differences between signals, allowing the resulting mixtures to 
reflect realistic scenarios where signals with different strengths may 
coexist.
We selected three distinct classes of signals from the ShipsEar dataset 
as recognition targets and one class as non-target interference: passenger 
ferries (PF), motorboats (MB), and ro-ro vessels (RV), with Class A 
representing non-target interference (NTInf). All chosen signals were 
downsampled to 32 kHz and segmented into 5-second segments. Algo-
rithm 1 and Fig. 1a illustrated the procedure for constructing interfered 
underwater acoustic MTDs using three target signal classes and one non- 
target interference signal class. The waveform and Mel-frequency 
spectrogram of signals before and after mixing are presented in Ap-
pendix A.
This study constructs MTDs by mixing signals based on the raw, 
maximum-normalized, and energy-normalized forms to examine the 
impact of different TIR ranges on recognition performance. This process 
produces three MTDs with varying TIR ranges: SE_raw, SE_norm, and 
SE_en0. Where SE_raw and SE_norm preserve the intensity disparities 
inherent in real underwater acoustic signals, thereby maintaining the 
variability typically observed in practical scenarios. In contrast, SE_en0 
is an ideal dataset in which all targets in mixed signals have equal en-
ergy. This setting is employed to evaluate the upper-bound performance 
of the proposed method under controlled conditions.
Algorithm 1. Construct interfered MTDs
INPUT:
PF(passenger ferries),
MB(motorboats),
RV(ro  rovessels),
NTInf (non-target interference),
ND (noise data),
k (number of mixed signals)
OUTPUT:
D (Constructed MTD)
1. D=[]
2. combinations =[(PF, MB),(PF, RV),(MB, RV),(PF,MB,RV)]
3. FOR each group in combinations
DO
a. count = 0
b. WHILE count < k
DO
i. selected_signal = RandomSelect (group, 1)
ii. interference = RandomSelect (NTInf, 1)
iii. interfered_signal = Mix ([selected_signal, interference])
iv. D ← Append (D, interfered_signal)
v. count = count + 1
4. D← Append (D, PF, MB, RV, NTInf, ND)
5. RETURN D
6. FUNCTION RandomSelect (data, k)
a. indices ← Randomly choose k unique indices from 1 to len(data)
b. RETURN data[indices]
7. FUNCTION Append (list, element)
a. list ← list + [element]
(continued on next page)
L. Chen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Expert Systems With Applications 296 (2026) 129122 
4 

(continued)
Algorithm 1. Construct interfered MTDs
b. RETURN list
8. FUNCTION Mix (list)
a. mixed ← sum(list) / len(list)
b. RETURN mixed
The constructed MTDs consist of signals with different target configu-
rations: three classes containing one target, three containing two targets, 
one containing three targets, and one without any targets. The class 
without targets originates from NTInf and the background noise data 
(ND) in ShipsEar. These samples are incorporated into the dataset to 
improve the interference learning capability of the recognition model 
Fig. 2.
Table 1 displays the TIR ranges and signal labels for different classes 
within the SE_raw and SE_norm MTDs, whereas the SE_en0 MTD main-
tains a fixed 0 dB for all mixed signals. As shown in Table 1, the SE_raw 
MTD features TIR values ranging from   47 dB to 45 dB, while the 
SE_norm MTD shows a narrower range between   31 dB and 21 dB. 
Fig. 3 visualizes these TIR distributions across MTDs. The mixed target 
MTDs generally exhibit TIR distributions that approximate a normal 
distribution pattern.
Unlike single-target recognition, each sample in the MTDs is asso-
ciated with a set of labels. The length of this label vector corresponds to 
the number of targets included in the MTD, with each position repre-
senting a specific target. If a signal contains a target, the corresponding 
label position is assigned a value of 1; otherwise, it remains 0. The signal 
labels for the MTDs are presented in the last column of Table 1.
This study performed a comprehensive evaluation of MTDs, 
extending beyond the analysis of their TIRs by incorporating various 
metrics to assess dataset characteristics. Label Cardinality (M.-L. Zhang 
& Zhou, 2014) was utilized to quantify the multi-labeled nature of 
MTDs. In addition, this study employed MeanIR (Charte & Rivera, 
2013), CVIR (Charte & Rivera, 2013), MeanImR (M.-L. Zhang et al., 
2022), and CVImR (B. Liu et al., 2022) to evaluate target balance levels. 
The mathematical definitions for these metrics are provided in Equa-
tions (1) to (7). These target-based metrics apply to three categories: PF, 
MB, and RV, with the target count determined by their occurrence fre-
quency in the MTD.
Label Cardinality measures the average number of labels per sample 
in the MTD, reflecting the average number of targets in each signal 
within the underwater acoustic dataset. 
LCard(D)= 1
N
∑N
i=1
|Yi| (1) 
where N is the total number of samples and |Yi| is the number of labels 1 
in each sample.
MeanIR represents the average of all class IRperLabels (Charte & 
Rivera, 2013). IRperLabel is the ratio of the number of targets of the 
largest class to that of the current targets class. Higher values indicate a 
greater degree of data imbalance. 
IRLbli =
Y|Y|
argmax
yʹ= Y1
(∑|D|
j=1h
 
yʹ, Yj
))
∑|D|
j=1h
 
yi, Yj
) , h
 
y, Yj
)
=
{ 1, y∈ Yj
0, y∕∈ Yj
(2) 
MeanIR= 1
|Y|
∑|Y|
i=1
IRLbli (3) 
where h
 
y, Yj
)
is an indicator function representing the number of 
samples in the dataset containing the label Yj, while |Y| denotes the 
number of target classes.
CVIR, the coefficient of variation of IRperLabel, measures the 
imbalance similarity across all targets. A higher CVIR value indicates 
greater differences in imbalance levels among targets. 
CVIR= 1
MeanIR
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
∑|Y|
i=1
(IRLbli  MeanIR)2
|Y|  1
√√√√ (4) 
ImR (M.-L. Zhang et al., 2022) measures the class skewness between 
positive and negative samples, while MeanImR is the average of all class 
ImR values. 
ImRi = max
 ⃒⃒D+
i
⃒⃒,
⃒⃒D 
i
⃒⃒)
min
 ⃒⃒D+
i
⃒⃒,
⃒⃒D 
i
⃒⃒) (5) 
MeanImR= 1
|Y|
∑|Y|
i=1
ImRi (6) 
where D+
i is the number of positive samples of label Yi, and D 
i is that of 
the negative samples. Specifically, D+
i = {xi,+1|yi∈ Yj, 1≤ j≤ N}, 
D 
i ={xi,  1|yi∕∈ Yj,1≤ j≤ N}.
CVImR is the coefficient of variation of ImR, with higher values 
indicating a higher imbalance level in the MTD. 
CVImR= 1
MeanImR
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
∑|Y|
i=1
 
ImRj  MeanImR
)2
|Y|  1
√√√√ (7) 
The properties of one MTD are presented in Table 2 as the three 
MTDs differ only in their mixed-signal TIRs. The balance metrics pre-
sented in Table 2 indicate that the MTDs are well-balanced. The distri-
bution of each target class balance is reflected in the MeanIR value, 
which is close to 1, while the CVIR and CVImR values remain near 0.
Fig. 2. TIR Distribution Across Different MTDs.
Table 1 
TIR ranges and signal labels of underwater acoustic MTDs with interference.
Signal Type SE_raw SE_norm Label
PF PF / NTInf [-44, 38] [-26, 19] [1, 0, 0]
MB MB / NTInf [-29, 29] [-24, 15] [0, 1, 0]
RV RV / NTInf [-31, 36] [-15, 17] [0, 0, 1]
PF + MB PF / NTInf 
MB / NTInf
[-45, 42] 
[-34, 40]
[-29, 19] 
[-26, 20]
[1, 1, 0]
PF + RV PF / NTInf 
RV / NTInf
[-47, 45] 
[-36, 40]
[-30, 19] 
[-16, 20]
[1, 0, 1]
MB + RV MB / NTInf 
RV / NTInf
[-34, 41] 
[-34, 39]
[-27, 19] 
[-17, 20]
[0, 1, 1]
PF + MB + RV PF / NTInf 
MB / NTInf 
RV / NTInf
[-46, 39] 
[-35, 40] 
[-34, 39]
[-31, 21] 
[-27, 20] 
[-18, 21]
[1, 1, 1]
NTInf & Noise / / / [0, 0, 0]
L. Chen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Expert Systems With Applications 296 (2026) 129122 
5 

However, the number of signals containing only one target in con-
structed MTDs is smaller than those containing multiple targets due to 
the limited signal length of each target class in the ShipsEar dataset. The 
existing MTD balance evaluation metrics do not fully capture the 
imbalance characteristics between differently labeled samples in the 
dataset. Therefore, we introduce sample-based dataset balance metrics 
to provide a more comprehensive evaluation of MTD attributes.
The sample-based metrics initially employ the label powerset 
(Sorower, 2010) method to convert all label sets in the MTD into a single 
label, transforming the dataset into a conventional multi-classification 
dataset. Equations (8) to (10) provide the calculation details. 
LP IRLbli = max
 
LPj
)
LPi
, 1≤ i≤ 2|Y| (8) 
LP MeanIR= 1
|LP|
∑|LP|
i=1
LP IRLbli (9) 
LP CVIR= 1
LPMeanIR
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
∑|LP|
i=1
(LP IRLbli  LP MeanIR)2
|LP|  1
√√√√ (10) 
where LP represents the transformed label, |LP| denotes the number of 
classes in the transformed dataset, and LP IRLbli quantifies the disparity 
in sample counts across classes. A larger LP IRLbli value indicates a 
greater gap in sample numbers, signifying a higher level of sample-based 
class imbalance in the dataset. LP MeanIR is the average of LP IRLbli, 
and LP CVIR is the coefficient of variation.
As shown in Table 2, the class balance ratio for each label is lower 
than that of the corresponding target classes. This discrepancy reflects a 
skewed distribution where certain labels occur more frequently than 
others, emphasizing the necessity of implementing targeted resampling 
strategies to address the class imbalance and enhance model 
performance.
3.2. Resampling methods for MTDs
This work proposed two dataset-resample methods, the Underwater 
Acoustic Borderline Oversampling (UABOS) method, and the Minority 
Samples Weighted (MSW) method, to improve the balance level of 
MTDs. The flowcharts of the two resampling methods are shown in 
Fig. 3. It is worth noting that Fig. 3 is a schematic illustration based on 
dimension-reduced data, whereas the input to the recognition model is 
consistently in the form of Mel spectrograms.
The UABOS method is an improved version of the multi-label over-
sampling method based on borderline (MLBOS) (X.-Y. Zhang et al., 
2023), specifically tailored for MTDs of underwater acoustic signals with 
non-target interference. The sampling procedure is detailed in Fig. 3. (a) 
and Algorithm 2.
First, the label powerset method is applied for label conversion. 
Subsequently, the t-SNE algorithm reduces the dimensionality of MTDs 
to 2D to reduce the computational complexity of resampling, while the 
MLBOS does not. Following this, Equation (11) calculates the proportion 
of samples with different labels within the k-nearest neighbors 
Di
k={
 
xi
k,
 
yi
k
)}K
k=1 of each sample 
{ 
xi, yi
)}
in the minority class, 
where the sample count falls below the class average. 
ui = 1
K
∑
j∈yi
k
II
(
yj ∕= yi
)
(11) 
where I(⋅) is an indicator function, which returns 1 if the condition inside 
Fig. 3. Flowcharts of Resampling Methods.
Table 2 
Statistical properties of MTD.
LCard MeanIR CVIR MeanImR CVImR LP_MeanIR LP_CVIR
SE_raw 2.18 1.03 0.02 2.67 0.09 14.06 1.25
L. Chen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Expert Systems With Applications 296 (2026) 129122 
6 

the parentheses is met and 0 otherwise.
Algorithm 2 UABOS
INPUT: MTD: D, dataset sample rate:p
OUTPUT: resampled MTD Dʹ
1. label conversion: Dj ∈ D(j= 1,2,...,dl), Nj =
⃒⃒Dj
⃒⃒
2. Demb = tSNE(D), k= 1
2 min
 
Nj
)
, nnj = 0, BORDERS=∅
3. FOR xi in D DO
a.knni = KNN(xi,k)
b. calculate type(xi) according to Eq.(11) and (12)
c. IF type(xi)== ds THEN
i.nnj = nnj + 1
ii. BORDERS = BORDERS ∪xi
4. calculate γi according to Eq. (13)
5. FOR xi in BORDERS DO
a. cloneSamples ← clone n× p× γi samples from xi
b.Dʹ= Dʹ∪ cloneSamples
6. RETURN Dʹ
Equation (12) determines whether a sample is a boundary sample. The 
MLBOS method categorizes samples into three groups based on the value 
of ui. When ui = 1, the sample is assigned to a separate category and 
excluded from resampling calculations.
In contrast, the UABOS method merges the cases of 0.5≤ ui < 1 and 
ui = 1, including both within the resampling procedure. 
type(xi)=
{
ss, if0≤ ui < 0.5
ds, if0.5≤ ui ≤ 1 (12) 
where ss refers to a safe sample, while ds denotes a dangerous sample.
Samples classified as ds types using Equations (11) and (12) require 
up-sampling. Their hazard level, calculated using Equation (13), de-
termines the sampling frequency. 
γi =
 
N  Nj
)
|Dj
ds|∑ 
N  Nj
) (13) 
where |Dj
ds| is the number of dangerous samples in the j-th class of 
samples, N is the mean value of each class of samples, and Nj is the 
number of samples in each class.
Table 3 presents the balance levels of the resampled MTDs. This 
study performs resampling only on the training sets to better align with 
practical application scenarios. The class balance is preserved during 
dataset division, as a percentage of samples are randomly selected from 
each class for the training set. The balance levels of the resampled 
training sets closely align with those of the corresponding entire MTDs, 
as shown in Table 3.
In the UABOS algorithm, the resampling rate p was set to 1. 
Following the application of UABOS, all MTD metrics either decreased 
or remained stable. LP_MeanIR declined from 14.09 to 4.05, indicating a 
reduced disparity in sample counts among classes within the resampled 
MTD.
The MSW method allocates weights to classes in the MTDs with 
sample counts below the average, effectively duplicating samples from 
these underrepresented classes to balance the distribution. This study 
conducted several MSW resampling experiments to verify that the 
resampled MTDs enhance recognition performance. Based on the find-
ings, the final weights assigned to the three classes—PF, MB, and 
RV—are 3, 5, and 5, respectively.
The metrics of the MTD training set after resampling with the MSW 
method, as shown in Table 3, indicate a reduction in LP_MeanIR and 
LP_CVIR. This result suggests that the MSW resampling method en-
hances the label balance of the MTD. However, as the different target 
classes in the originally constructed MTD were already relatively 
balanced, the MSW resampling process adjusts the sample count for each 
target, leading to a slight increase in certain target-related metrics.
Fig. 4 compares the TIR distributions of the MTDs before and after 
resampling. The results demonstrate that the overall pattern of the TIR 
distribution remains consistent, as the resampling method does not 
substantially alter the data volume. Moreover, the resampling process 
introduces a certain level of randomness, ensuring sufficient represen-
tation of data within each TIR range.
4. Recognition methodology
The overall pipeline of our proposed UAMTR methodology is sum-
marized in Fig. 5. It includes three main components: multi-target data 
(MTD) construction, MTD resampling, and target recognition. This 
section focuses on the recognition model.
To address the challenge posed by non-target interference in un-
derwater acoustic signals, this study presents a UAMTR model based on 
TResNet (Ridnik, Lawen, et al., 2021). The TResNet model integrates the 
ResNet (He et al., 2016) architecture with a channel attention mecha-
nism (squeeze-and-excitation, SE) block (Hu et al., 2018). The channel 
attention mechanism block dynamically emphasizes informative feature 
channels while suppressing redundant or irrelevant ones, thereby 
enhancing the model’s ability to utilize meaningful information. In the 
presence of non-target interference in the UAMTR task, this mechanism 
helps suppress interference and enables the model to focus on feature 
channels that are more relevant to the target class. The structure of the 
SE block is shown in Fig. 6.
The SE block first applies global average pooling to the input W×
H× C feature map, generating a channel-wise vector of size 1× 1× C, as 
shown in Equation (14). 
Zc = Fsq(Xi)= 1
W× H
∑W
j=1
∑H
k=1
Xi(j, k) (14) 
where Zc is the value of the c-th channel of the compressed vector.
This vector is then passed through a gating mechanism consisting of 
two fully connected layers to learn the channel attention weights, as 
defined in Equation (15). 
F= Fex(z, W)= σ(W2δ(W1z)) (15) 
where W is the network weights, σ and δ are the activation functions.
Finally, the learned attention weights are applied to the original 
feature map to perform channel-wise reweighting, as described in 
Equation (16). 
̂Xi = Fscale(Xi, F)= FXi (16) 
where Fscale refers to channel-wise multiplication.
This process enables the SE module to selectively enhance informa-
tive channel features while suppressing those with strong noise inter-
ference, thereby improving the representation of target-relevant 
features.
Table 3 
Comparison of MTD properties before and after resampling.
LCard MeanIR CVIR MeanImR CVImR LP_MeanIR LP_CVIR
SE 2.18 1.03 0.02 2.67 0.09 14.06 1.25
SE_trainset 2.18 1.03 0.02 2.67 0.09 14.09 1.25
SE_UABOS 2.06 1.02 0.02 2.19 0.06 4.05 0.81
SE_MSW 2.08 1.04 0.04 2.27 0.12 5.18 1.14
L. Chen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Expert Systems With Applications 296 (2026) 129122 
7 

The TResNet is available in three versions that differ in model depth 
and channel count: TResNet-M, TResNet-L, and TResNet-XL. The pro-
posed model, TResNet-LA, extends TResNet-L by incorporating a chan-
nel attention layer. The architecture of TResNet-LA is depicted in Fig. 7.
Although the original TResNet authors suggest that the SE module’s 
global average pooling offers limited benefits in the final low-resolution 
feature processing stage, our experimental findings reveal its critical role 
in interference mitigation for underwater acoustic target recognition. 
Based on this insight, the proposed TResNet-LA, an enhanced 
architecture that integrates the SE module into the final stage of the 
TResNet-L, is optimized for UAMTR in non-target interference-rich un-
derwater environments.
The left subplot in Fig. 7 depicts the architecture of the TResNet-LA 
model, with the output feature dimensions displayed in brown font at 
the lower right corner of each module. The model processes the Mel- 
frequency spectrogram of an underwater acoustic multi-target signal 
with interference as input, which has dimensions of 500 × 128.
First, the spectrogram passes through a SpaceToDepth trans-
Fig. 4. TIR Distribution of MTDs Before and After Resampling.
Fig. 5. Flowchart of UAMTR Method.
Fig. 6. A Channel Attention Mechanism (Squeeze-and-Excitation, SE) Block.
L. Chen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Expert Systems With Applications 296 (2026) 129122 
8 

formation layer (Sandler et al., 2019). The SpaceToDepth module re-
organizes spatial data blocks into depth, effectively reducing the input 
resolution and producing an output feature of 125 × 32 × 48. This 
feature is then processed by a convolution layer to adjust the channel 
count, followed by two Basic blocks and two Bottleneck blocks for 
feature extraction. Subsequently, the SE layer performs the final feature 
filtering, after which the resulting feature map undergoes global average 
pooling before being passed to the fully connected layer. Given that this 
task involves multi-target recognition, a Sigmoid activation function is 
applied to map each dimension of the output vector to a value between 
0 and 1. A threshold σ is then employed, where values exceeding the 
threshold are set to 1, while the rest are set to 0, yielding the final 
UAMTR predicted labels.
The middle and right subplots of Fig. 7 display the structures of the 
Basic block and Bottleneck block. IBN denotes Inplace-BatchNorm, 
which performs tensor operations in place without creating additional 
copies. The notation r= 4or8 following the SE layer represents the 
reduction factor. In the TResNet-L model, the two Basic blocks and two 
Bottleneck blocks are repeated 4, 5, 18, and 3 times, respectively. The 
first three modules incorporate an SE layer, whereas the final module 
does not. Details of the model architecture and training settings are 
provided in Appendix C.
Fig. 8 illustrates the structural comparison of the residual module in 
the ResNet architecture before and after the integration of the SE block. 
In the SE_ResNet module, the feature maps produced by the residual 
block are fed into the SE module, which performs channel-wise 
reweighting to enhance the salient features within the signal.
5. Experimentation
This work carried out a series of experiments to assess the effec-
tiveness and robustness of the TResNet-LA model and the proposed 
dataset resampling strategies for the UAMTR task. Section 5.1 provides a 
comprehensive description of the experimental setup and evaluation 
metrics. Section 5.2 validates the UAMTR method across three MTDs 
with different TIR ranges, highlighting its impact on multi-target 
recognition performance. Section 5.3 analyzes the impact of mixed 
target quantity on recognition accuracy. Section 5.4 compares the ef-
fects of two resampling techniques, UABOS and MSW, on recognition 
results. Section 5.5 benchmarks the recognition performance of 
TResNet-LA against baseline models in the UAMTR task under non- 
target interference conditions. Finally, Appendix D showcases the 
MTD constructed from the raw DeepShip (Irfan et al., 2021) signals, 
along with the corresponding recognition results, to further validate the 
model’s generalization capability on MTDs that closely resemble real- 
world scenarios.
Fig. 7. Architecture of the TResNet-LA Model.
Fig. 8. The Schema of the Original Residual Module (left) and the SE_ResNet 
Module (right).
L. Chen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Expert Systems With Applications 296 (2026) 129122 
9 

5.1. Experimental setup and evaluation metrics
The datasets used in this section consist of the three MTDs con-
structed in Section 3, each featuring different ranges of TIR. Table 1
details the TIR ranges of the mixed signals in each MTD, and Fig. 2 vi-
sualizes their distribution. All three MTDs share identical parameters 
apart from the TIR ranges. Table 3 shows the average number of targets 
per sample for each MTD and their balance level. During the experi-
mental process, we divide each class of MTDs into training, validation, 
and test sets in the ratio of 70 %, 15 %, and 15 %, with respective counts 
of 26,831, 5,748, and 5,756. Except for part of the experiments in Sec-
tion 5.2, all other analyses in this section use the complete dataset 
constructed in Section 3.
The evaluation metrics adopted in this study for multi-target recog-
nition are consistent with standard multi-label classification assessment 
frameworks, encompassing sample and label-based measures 
(Tsoumakas et al., 2010). Sample-based metrics examine the differences 
between the ground truth labels Yi and the predicted labels Zi across all 
test samples, offering an overall assessment of performance at the 
dataset level. In contrast, label-based metrics perform separate evalua-
tions for each label, which, in the context of UAMTR, involves inde-
pendently assessing the recognition results for specific targets.
The sample-based evaluation metric adopted in this work is the 
global accuracy (global_acc), formally defined through the following 
equation: 
global acc= 1
|Dtest|
∑|Dtest|
i=1
I(Zi = Yi) (17) 
where |Dtest| represents the test set cardinality (total number of evalu-
ation instances).
The global_acc metric applies more stringent verification criteria, 
considering a prediction correct only when both the target category 
recognition and the quantity estimation exactly match the ground truth 
annotations.
The label-based evaluation framework employs two measurement 
paradigms: macro and micro averages, computed using Equations (18) 
and (19). 
MacroM= 1
L
∑L
i=1
evalM(TPi, FPi, TNi, FNi) (18) 
MicroM= evalM
(
1
L
∑L
i=1
TPi,
∑L
i=1
FPi,
∑L
i=1
TNi,
∑L
i=1
FNi
)
(19) 
where L denotes the label cardinality (total predicted targets), with TPi,
FPi,TNi, and FNi representing the confusion matrix components for the 
i-th target class: true positives, false positives, true negatives, and false 
negatives, respectively.
This study adopts macro-averaged metrics as the primary evaluation 
mechanism for individual target recognition performance analysis. The 
comprehensive assessment framework comprises accuracy, precision, 
recall, F1-score (Sokolova & Lapalme, 2009), and mean Average Preci-
sion (mAP) (Everingham et al., 2010). Macro-averaging treats each 
target class equally, regardless of sample size, enabling a balanced 
evaluation across target classes. Formal mathematical representations of 
these metrics for the j-th target category are provided in Equations (20)- 
(23). 
Accuracyj = 1
|D|
∑|D|
i=1
I
 
Yij = Zij
)
(20) 
Precisionj = TPj
TPj+ FPj
(21) 
Recallj = TPj
TPj+ FNj
(22) 
F1j = 2*Precisionj*Recallj
Precisionj*Recallj
(23) 
With the evaluation metrics established, we now outline the data 
processing procedures and model settings crucial for obtaining reliable 
and meaningful results. The signal processing pipeline applies a 1024- 
point Hanning window to transform time-domain waveforms into Mel- 
spectrogram representations, which serve as the model inputs. Critical 
preprocessing parameters include 320-frame overlap, 128 Mel filter 
banks, and a spectral bandwidth of 14 kHz. The training setup utilizes 
Asymmetric Loss (ASL) (Ridnik, Ben-Baruch, et al., 2021) with focal 
parameter settings (γ_neg = 6, γ_pos = 0), optimized through AdamW 
with 32 batch sizes across 80 epochs. All model parameters were 
initialized randomly, and the entire network was trained from scratch 
without using any form of transfer learning.
5.2. Performance of TResNet-LA across different TIRs
Table 4 summarizes the recognition performance across the three 
MTDs with different TIR ranges. The TResNet-LA model exhibits pro-
gressive improvement as the TIR range becomes narrower, with global 
accuracy increasing from 49.69 % to 91.38 %. On the SE_en0 MTD, the 
model reaches peak performance with 91.38 % global_acc and 96.77 % 
macro_acc. Notably, even in the most challenging SE_raw dataset char-
acterized by wide TIR variations, the TResNet_LA model maintains 80 % 
macro_acc, confirming its robustness in UAMTR under interference. The 
visual analysis of the prediction results of the same sample at different 
energy ratios is shown in Appendix B. The class-wise metrics are detailed 
in Appendix E.
Table 5 presents the recognition results on three MTDs without non- 
target interference. Specifically, SE_raw_noInD, SE_norm_noInD, and 
SE_en0_noInD correspond to the versions of SE_raw, SE_norm, and 
SE_en0, respectively, where no non-target interference was added dur-
ing the creation of the mixed signals.
Compared with the results in Table 4, the model shows a significant 
performance improvement in the absence of non-target interference. 
The global accuracy increases by 18.51, 19.17, and 6.71 percentage 
points on SE_raw_noInD, SE_norm_noInD, and SE_en0_noInD, respec-
tively. The improvement is more pronounced on SE_raw and SE_norm, 
where the energy differences among targets are larger, while the gains 
on SE_en0 are relatively moderate. A similar trend is observed across 
other evaluation metrics as well.
These results suggest that the model performs better when non-target 
interference is absent, indicating that it is indeed learning discriminative 
target features rather than relying on background interference patterns. 
This provides further evidence of the model’s strong generalization 
ability and robustness.
Fig. 9 shows the recognition performance of the TResNet_LA model 
across three evaluation metrics—accuracy, F1-score, and mAP—for in-
dividual targets under different dataset configurations. The results 
reveal that PF targets consistently exhibit the lowest recognition per-
formance on both SE_raw and SE_norm MTDs compared to other targets, 
primarily due to their broader energy fluctuation range. As shown in 
Table 1, PF displays greater TIR variance than others, making it more 
Table 4 
Recognition results of non-target interfered MTDs under various TIRs.
global_acc macro_acc precision recall F1-score mAP
SE_raw 49.69 78.77 84.49 86.77 85.60 93.65
SE_norm 68.16 87.30 91.14 91.52 91.32 97.57
SE_en0 91.38 96.77 97.39 98.21 97.80 99.71
L. Chen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Expert Systems With Applications 296 (2026) 129122 
10 

susceptible to signal interference and thus posing additional recognition 
challenges.
Interestingly, the SE_en0 dataset presents a notable exception, where 
PF slightly outperforms RV in recognition metrics, offering direct 
empirical evidence that TIR fluctuations substantially affect recognition 
performance. This comparative analysis confirms that broader energy 
variance in SE_raw and SE_norm MTDs inherently increases the diffi-
culty of target recognition.
The confusion matrices in Fig. 10 reveal the misclassification pat-
terns among MB, RV, and PF targets. The MB class was incorrectly 
predicted as a combination of PF and MB in 43.33 %, 73.33 %, and 20 % 
of samples across the three MTDs. Likewise, the RV class was mis-
classified as a mixture of PF and RV in 48.94 %, 61.70 %, and 31.91 % of 
samples. PF targets were most frequently misclassified as either dual- 
target or three-target signals.
The model exhibits an inherent multiclass prediction bias, prefer-
entially predicting multiple targets over single-target instances. For 
instance, when processing signals containing two target types, the model 
frequently predicted them as three-target signals, especially on the 
SE_raw and SE_norm MTDs. Additionally, the model demonstrated 
weaker performance in recognizing single-class targets against multi- 
target signals. This limitation stems from the scarcity of single-target 
samples within the dataset. The sample imbalance led the model to 
favor multi-target predictions while showing reduced effectiveness in 
single-target recognition. This study introduced two dataset resample 
methods to mitigate data imbalance effects on recognition results. Sec-
tion 5.4 presents the recognition performance after dataset resampling.
Fig. 11 presents the recognition error rates across different TIR 
ranges. The error rate within each interval is calculated as the propor-
tion of misrecognized samples relative to the total number of samples in 
Table 5 
Recognition results of MTDs without interference under various TIRs.
global_acc macro_acc precision recall F1-score mAP
SE_raw_noInD 68.20 88.27 91.76 92.33 92.04 97.91
SE_norm_noInD 87.87 95.66 97.53 96.55 97.03 99.63
SE_en0_noInD 98.09 99.23 99.41 99.54 99.47 99.97
Fig. 9. Recognition Performance Across TIR Ranges for Individual Targets.
Fig. 10. Confusion Matrices of Three MTD Test Sets.
L. Chen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Expert Systems With Applications 296 (2026) 129122 
11 

that specific TIR range. For multi-target samples, the assigned range is 
determined by the lowest TIR value among the targets present. Samples 
without detectable target signals are excluded from these calculations to 
ensure a focused evaluation. The error rates reflect a sample-based 
assessment, requiring exact matches between predictions and the 
ground truth. For SE_norm, the first and final ranges include samples 
with TIR values below   20 dB and above 10 dB, respectively.
The results reveal elevated error rates in lower TIR intervals. This 
trend arises because samples with lower TIRs contain low-energy targets 
whose features are masked by stronger targets and interference, result-
ing in greater recognition challenges. Specifically, when TIR drops 
below   10 dB, the recognition error rate becomes markedly high. In 
contrast, as the TIR surpasses 10 dB, the error rate decreases signifi-
cantly with increasing TIR, except for a slight anomaly in the 20 to 30 dB 
range for the SE_raw dataset. Notably, the SE_raw dataset maintains 
complete and accurate recognition for over 40 % of samples even when 
TIRs are below 30 dB, confirming the effectiveness and robustness of 
TResNet-LA.
Additionally, SE_norm shows reduced error rates compared to 
SE_raw across all TIR intervals. This improvement results from nar-
rowing the dataset’s TIR range, which facilitates more accurate feature 
extraction and lowers the complexity of recognition.
5.3. Effect of mixed target quantity on recognition accuracy
This section presents comparative experiments on MTDs featuring 
different numbers of mixed targets to explore how the quantity of targets 
within mixed signals influences multi-target recognition accuracy. 
Specifically, we exclude categories containing three-target mixtures 
from the three MTDs constructed in Section 3.1, resulting in SE_r-
aw_tar2, SE_norm_tar2, and SE_en0_tar2 MTDs, each comprising at most 
two-target mixtures. Multi-target recognition experiments under non- 
target interference conditions were subsequently carried out using 
these refined MTDs. The experimental configurations remained consis-
tent throughout, with the only variation being the MTDs used. Figs. 12 
and 13 depict the comparative results for global and macro accuracy.
As shown in Fig. 12, the removal of three-target mixtures results in 
substantial improvements in global recognition accuracy. The gains are 
13.97, 10.26, and 1.35 percentage points for the raw, normalized, and 0 
dB TIR MTDs, respectively. Additional macro accuracy results across 
individual targets are presented in Fig. 13.
These improvements are primarily attributed to the effect of target 
masking under varying TIR conditions. In MTDs with broader TIR 
ranges, weaker target signals are more likely to be masked by stronger 
non-target interference. As the number of mixed targets increases, signal 
overlap becomes more complex, intensifying the interference and 
further suppressing the recognition of weaker targets. Therefore, 
reducing the number of mixed targets in these MTDs helps mitigate 
masking effects and significantly improves recognition accuracy.
In contrast, for the dataset with a fixed 0 dB TIR—where target and 
non-target signals have approximately equal energy—the masking effect 
is less severe, and the model becomes less sensitive to the number of 
mixed targets. As shown in Fig. 6(c), the recognition accuracy for two- 
target and three-target mixtures remains similarly close in this sce-
nario. Consequently, the accuracy gains from removing three-target 
mixtures are modest, and in some cases, target-specific recognition ac-
curacy may even slightly decrease.
5.4. Effect of resampling strategies on recognition performance
This section evaluates the impact of the data resampling method on 
recognition performance. The evaluation involves three MTDs with 
different TIR ranges and employs both TResNet-L and TResNet-LA 
models to guarantee unbiased results.
Tables 6 and 7 provide the recognition performance of models before 
and after applying two different dataset resampling methods. Fig. 14
illustrates the recognition results for each target within the SE_norm 
dataset. It is important to emphasize that only the training sets under-
went resampling, while the validation and test sets remained un-
changed.Table 8.
Across six experimental groups, the differences in global_acc be-
tween higher-accuracy resampled and non-resampled MTDs are 1.25, 
0.82,   0.17, 1.65, 1.79, and 0.37. An exception occurs with the SE_en0 
dataset, where the TResNet-LA model shows marginally lower global_-
acc after resampling. This exception stems from the SE_en0 dataset 
having a 0 dB TIR, allowing the TResNet-LA model to perform well 
under such interference. In this case, most recognition failures arise 
when target features become entirely obscured. It is hard to resolve by 
resampling the dataset. On the contrary, duplicating samples may 
introduce redundant information into the dataset, potentially reducing 
the recognition performance.
However, Table 7 reveals modest accuracy gains for the TResNet-L 
model on the resampled SE_en0_UABOS and SE_en0_MSW MTDs 
compared to the original SE_en0. The improvement suggests that the 
TResNet-L model is less capable of fully extracting discriminative 
Fig. 11. Recognition Error Rates of SE_raw and SE_norm Test Sets on Varying 
TIR Ranges.
Fig. 12. Global Accuracy Comparison of MTDs with Varying Mixed Target 
Numbers and TIRs.
L. Chen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Expert Systems With Applications 296 (2026) 129122 
12 

features from underwater acoustic multi-target signals than the 
TResNet-LA. Consequently, dataset resampling provides measurable 
benefits for TResNet-L despite its limitations in feature extraction.
Concerning recognition accuracy, three groups of experiments show 
improved results with MSW-resampled MTDs, two perform better with 
UABOS-resampled data, and one achieves higher accuracy without any 
resampling. Table 3 indicates that the UABOS and MSW resampling 
methods improve the dataset balance level. The MSW method, however, 
slightly introduces some target imbalance. It is important to note that 
data balance alone does not determine final recognition performance. 
Experimental results show that tuning the weights of the MSW method 
for each underrepresented category does not necessarily improve the 
recognition accuracy of underwater acoustic multi-target signals. The 
MSW method cannot determine weights based solely on balance metrics. 
The UABOS method achieves better target and label balance than the 
MSW method but does not guarantee a significant improvement in 
recognition performance.
Fig. 14 demonstrates that dataset resampling algorithms enhance 
recognition performance across all targets. Nonetheless, PF maintains 
the lowest recognition accuracy among the three targets, while the RV 
target achieves the highest. This result occurs because the resampling 
method adjusts only sample quantities without increasing data diversity. 
The RV target continues to exhibit the highest TIR fluctuations in the 
resampled dataset. Therefore, improving data balance boosts recogni-
tion performance within limits but cannot surpass targets with lower 
energy range fluctuations.
5.5. Performance comparison of TResNet-LA and baseline models
This section evaluates the effectiveness of the proposed TResNet-LA 
model by comparing its recognition performance against TResNet-L, 
ResNet50 (He et al., 2016), TResNet-M (Ridnik, Lawen, et al., 2021), 
and the channel attention-enhanced variants of the latter two models, 
ResNet50-A and TResNet-MA. The overall recognition results on three 
Fig. 13. Macro Accuracy Comparison of Individual MTD Targets with Varying Mixed Target Numbers.
Table 6 
TResNet-LA recognition performance using different resampling methods.
Dataset Methods global_acc macro_acc precision recall F1-score mAP
​ Not resample 49.69 78.77 84.49 86.77 85.60 93.65
SE_raw UABOS 50.66 79.25 84.89 87.01 85.92 93.75
MSW 50.94 79.33 84.91 87.04 85.96 93.62​
Not resmaple 68.16 87.30 91.14 91.52 91.32 97.57SE_norm
UABOS 68.79 87.57 91.52 91.46 91.49 97.51
MSW 68.98 87.67 91.17 92.09 91.61 97.42​
Not resample 91.38 96.77 97.39 98.21 97.80 99.71SE_en0
UABOS 90.83 96.59 97.3 98.07 97.68 99.71
MSW 91.21 96.70 97.46 98.05 97.75 99.72​
Table 7 
TResNet-L recognition performance using different resampling methods.
Dataset Resample method global_acc macro_acc precision recall F1-score mAP
​ Not resample 46.30 77.56 83.67 85.95 84.80 93.11
SE_raw UABOS 47.95 78.08 84.15 86.16 85.12 93.20
MSW 47.41 78.11 84.08 86.25 85.13 92.70​
Not resmaple 63.19 85.59 89.47 91.08 90.25 96.67SE_norm
UABOS 64.37 86.27 89.71 91.77 90.72 97.23
MSW 64.98 86.47 89.70 92.18 90.90 97.13​
Not resample 88.81 95.97 96.23 98.36 97.28 99.66SE_en0
UABOS 89.18 96.11 96.55 98.20 97.36 99.67
MSW 89.09 96.10 96.49 98.25 97.36 99.68​
L. Chen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Expert Systems With Applications 296 (2026) 129122 
13 

MTDs are presented in Table 8. Target-based recognition performance 
comparisons are detailed in Fig. 15. To ensure a fair comparison, ex-
periments on each dataset maintained identical settings across models 
except for the recognition architectures. All reported results in this 
section are based on the MSW-resampled dataset. The architectures and 
configurations of the baseline models are shown in Fig. C.3 of Appendix 
C.
As shown in Table 8, the proposed TResNet-LA model consistently 
outperforms the baseline models across all three MTDs. These results 
highlight the enhanced capability and generalization of TRessNet-LA in 
UAMTR under non-target interference conditions. Specifically, TResNet- 
LA achieves global_acc improvements of 7.82, 5.98, and 9.02 percentage 
points over the weakest baseline model on three MTDs. Its macro_acc 
surpasses the lowest-performing baseline by 2.59, 1.91, and 3.33 per-
centage points, respectively. The comparative analysis reveals that 
global_acc exhibits greater model sensitivity than other metrics. These 
results arise because global_acc requires models to recognize distinct 
target features and differentiate interference signals for accurately 
determining target type and count. In conclusion, TResNet-LA out-
performs all baseline models in class prediction accuracy and quantity 
estimation for underwater acoustic targets.
Besides that, ResNet50-A, TResNet-MA, and TResNet-LA consistently 
achieve higher global_acc across all three MTDs compared to their 
counterparts without channel attention layers. The only exception ap-
pears in the SE_en0 MTD, where ResNet50 and ResNet50-A show iden-
tical global_acc. While incorporating channel attention does not 
Fig. 14. Recognition Performance for Each Target Before and After Dataset Resampling of SE_norm MTD: (Rows 1–2) Results for TResNet-LA and TResNet-L; 
(Columns 1–3) accuracy, F1-score and mAP for Each Model on Each Target.
Table 8 
Recognition results on different models and MTDs.
Dataset Model global_acc macro_acc precision recall F1-score mAP
​
SE_raw ResNet50 43.12 76.86 81.08 88.94 84.82 92.58
ResNet50-A 44.26 76.74 81.46 88.04 84.62 91.49
TResNet-M 47.64 77.83 84.04 85.86 84.93 93.17
TResNet-MA 49.32 78.46 84.51 86.17 85.33 93.57
TResNet-L 47.41 78.11 84.08 86.25 85.13 92.70
TResNet-LA 50.94 79.33 84.91 87.04 85.96 93.62
​
SE_norm ResNet50 63.00 86.05 88.02 93.85 90.81 96.58
ResNet50-A 66.93 87.37 89.91 93.33 91.56 96.81
TResNet-M 63.63 85.76 89.45 91.32 90.36 97.07
TResNet-MA 66.41 86.49 90.73 90.78 90.74 97.26
TResNet-L 64.98 86.47 89.70 92.18 90.90 97.13
TResNet-LA 68.98 87.67 91.17 92.09 91.61 97.42
​
SE_en0 ResNet50 82.19 93.54 94.13 97.29 95.67 99.07
ResNet50-A 82.19 93.37 94.31 96.80 95.54 99.03
TResNet-M 88.57 95.88 96.45 97.97 97.20 99.62
TResNet-MA 90.48 96.45 97.07 98.11 97.58 99.70
TResNet-L 89.09 96.10 96.49 98.25 97.36 99.68
TResNet-LA 91.21 96.70 97.46 98.05 97.75 99.72
L. Chen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Expert Systems With Applications 296 (2026) 129122 
14 

Fig. 15. Recognition Results for Each Target on Different Models and MTDs: (Rows 1–3) Results for the SE_raw, SE_norm, and SE_en0 MTDs; (Columns 1–3) pre-
cision, recall and F1-score for Each Target Across Different Models.
L. Chen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Expert Systems With Applications 296 (2026) 129122 
15 

guarantee improvements on all metrics, it generally leads to better 
recognition performance. Specifically, on the SE_norm MTD, the glob-
al_acc of the three attention-enhanced models increased by 3.93, 2.78, 
and 4.00 percentage points compared to their counterparts without 
attention layers. This study validates the effectiveness of channel 
attention mechanisms in boosting recognition performance for under-
water acoustic multi-target tasks through comprehensive evaluations 
across multiple MTDs and diverse model architectures, thereby mini-
mizing potential random experimental biases.
Fig. 15 presents the recognition precision, recall, and F1-score for 
each target across different models. The first column of Fig. 15 shows 
that the recognition precision trends for each target align with the 
patterns observed in Table 8. Models equipped with the channel atten-
tion layer consistently achieve higher recognition precision than those 
without. Among all models, TResNet-LA obtains the highest recognition 
precision for each target. On the SE_raw and SE_norm MTDs, it achieves 
the highest precision for RV targets, followed by MB, while PF targets 
have the lowest precision. This result is consistent with the conclusion in 
Section 5.2.
The results shown in the second column of Fig. 15 demonstrate 
distinct performance patterns among models. ResNet50 and ResNet50-A 
achieve the highest recall rates but simultaneously register the lowest 
precision values. This imbalance indicates their tendency toward over- 
classification of positive samples, which increases misidentification 
risks when processing interference signals. This tendency ultimately 
leads to their notably low global_acc and macro_acc shown in Table 8, 
despite their strong recall capabilities.
In contrast, TResNet-LA demonstrates competitive recall perfor-
mance, slightly lower than ResNet50 and ResNet50-A, while maintain-
ing clear advantages across all other metrics. These findings collectively 
confirm that TResNet-LA delivers superior recognition performance for 
UAMTR tasks under interference conditions. The model effectively 
balances recall and accuracy, making it a more reliable solution 
compared to baseline architectures.
6. Conclusion
This paper proposes TResNet-LA, a robust deep-learning model 
specifically designed to tackle the challenges of UAMTR under non- 
target interference conditions. To support this task, three non-target 
interfered multi-target datasets (MTDs)—SE_raw, SE_norm, and 
SE_en0—are generated from the ShipsEar dataset by mixing raw, 
maximum-normalized, and energy-normalized signals, each represent-
ing different TIR ranges. In addition, this study proposes two novel 
evaluation metrics to assess the balance level of these MTDs and in-
troduces two resampling strategies to address the class imbalance 
problem. Experimental results demonstrate that the MSW resampling 
method enhances the global accuracy of the TResNet-LA model on the 
SE_raw MTD by over one percentage point. Moreover, our model 
achieves over 90 % global recognition accuracy on the SE_en0 MTD. It is 
worth noticing that TResNet-LA significantly outperforms baseline 
models, achieving state-of-the-art recognition accuracy in UAMTR.
7. Discussion and future work
While this study demonstrates the effectiveness of deep learning 
models using synthetic mixed signals for the interfered UAMTR task, it is 
essential to acknowledge the limitations and risks associated with such 
modern techniques. Although synthetic signals are valuable for data 
augmentation and domain simulation, they may introduce distributional 
biases that do not fully capture the complexity of real-world underwater 
environments. Moreover, deep learning models—such as the ResNet- 
based framework employed in this work—lack interpretability, which 
poses challenges for their deployment in safety–critical applications like 
underwater surveillance. The generalization ability of models trained on 
synthetic data also remains uncertain when exposed to previously un-
seen or diverse acoustic interferences in real-world scenarios. Although 
the resampling strategy used in this study effectively improves the class 
balance of the mixed target dataset (MTD) by adjusting the number of 
samples for minority classes, it does not enhance the diversity of the 
samples. As a result, the improvement in recognition performance 
brought by this approach remains limited.
Our future work will aim to improve model interpretability, inte-
grate uncertainty estimation, and explore physics-informed or hybrid 
learning approaches to enhance robustness. Additionally, extensive 
evaluation of real-world and cross-domain datasets will be conducted to 
better define the deployment boundaries and ensure reliability in 
mission-critical underwater monitoring applications. Moreover, our 
future work will explore sample generation methods to refine the MTD. 
These methods aim to improve not only the class balance but also the 
diversity and authenticity of the samples, making the constructed MTD 
more representative of real-world underwater acoustic environments.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the China Scholarship Council No. 
202406090084, the National Natural Science Foundation of China 
under Grant 12174053, the Fund of Science and Technology on Sonar 
Laboratory No. 2023-JCJQ-LB-32/08, the Fundamental Research Funds 
for Central Universities No. 2242024K30004, 2242025F20003, and the 
Stable Supporting Fund of National Key Laboratory of Underwater 
Acoustic Technology No. JCKYS2023604SSJS014.
Appendix A 
L. Chen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Expert Systems With Applications 296 (2026) 129122 
16 

Fig. A1. Waveform and Mel-frequency spectrogram of one-target signals before and after mixed. Columns: target PF, InD, mixed signal; Rows: raw (TIR   30 dB), 
max-normalized (TIR   10 dB), energy-normalized signals (TIR 0 dB).
L. Chen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Expert Systems With Applications 296 (2026) 129122 
17 

Fig. A2. Waveform and Mel-frequency spectrogram of two-target signals before and after mixed. Columns: target MB, target RV, InD, mixed signal; Rows: raw (TIR 
  9 dB,   34 dB), max-normalized (TIR 2 dB,   11 dB), energy-normalized signals (TIR 0 dB).
L. Chen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Expert Systems With Applications 296 (2026) 129122 
18 

Fig. A3. Waveform and Mel-frequency spectrogram of three-target signals before and after mixed. Columns: target PF, target MB, target RV, InD, mixed signal; Rows: 
raw (TIR   17 dB,   25 dB,   18 dB), max-normalized (TIR   1 dB,   20 dB, 3 dB), energy-normalized signals (TIR 0 dB).
Appendix B 
Fig. B.1 presents the waveform and Mel spectrograms of the same sample under different Target-to-Interference Ratio (TIR) conditions, both before 
and after mixing. The mixed signals come from the SE_raw, SE_norm, and SE_en0 datasets. Table B.1 presents the corresponding TIR values, predicted 
probabilities, predicted labels, and ground truth for the sample in each dataset. Predicted probabilities greater than 0.8 are treated as 1, while the rest 
are treated as 0 to obtain the binary prediction labels.
From Fig. B.1, it can be observed that as the energy gap between different targets and interference narrows, the Mel spectrogram of the mixed 
signal retains more information. Specifically, in the SE_raw and SE_norm datasets, due to the weak energy of the RV target (TIR below   10 dB), most of 
its information is masked in the mixed signal, including the strong low-frequency components (0–512 Hz) and the vertical lines in the high-frequency 
range. In contrast, in the SE_en0 dataset, since the energy levels of both targets and interference are normalized, the features of all targets are largely 
preserved in the mixed signal.
As shown in Table B.1, when the mixed signal contains targets with low TIR, the model tends to make incorrect predictions—such as classifying the 
sample in SE_raw as containing all three targets. When the energy of the weak target is slightly enhanced (as in SE_norm), the model yields a correct 
prediction, but with probabilities of [0.77, 0.99, 0.83], indicating uncertainty in its decision. In contrast, in SE_en0, the predicted probabilities are 
[0.15, 1.0, 1.0], suggesting the model confidently recognizes the presence of MB and RV targets and accurately excludes the third. These differences in 
predicted probabilities across TIR conditions further demonstrate that TIR is a critical factor affecting recognition performance under interference in 
UAMTR tasks.
L. Chen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Expert Systems With Applications 296 (2026) 129122 
19 

Table B1 
Parameters of example.
TIR predicted probability predicted label ground truth
SE_raw 4 dB /   18 dB [0.96, 0.99, 0.99] [1, 1, 1] [0, 1, 1]
SE_norm 3 dB /   11 dB [0.77, 0.99, 0.83] [0, 1, 1] [0, 1, 1]
SE_en0 0 dB [0.15, 1.0, 1.0] [0, 1, 1] [0, 1, 1]
Fig. B1. Example of waveform and Mel-frequency spectrogram of signals before and after mixed. Columns: target MB, target RV, InD, mixed signal; Rows: raw 
signals, max-normalized signals, energy-normalized signals.
L. Chen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Expert Systems With Applications 296 (2026) 129122 
20 

Appendix C 
Appex
Table C1 
Summary of TResNet-LA model structure and input dimensions.
Layer name Output size Model configuration
Input size 500 × 128
Space to depth 125 × 32 Block size 4
Conv1 125 × 32 3 × 3, 76, stride 2
SE_conv1 125 × 32 ⎡
⎣
3× 3, 76, stride1
3× 3, 76, stride1
SEblock, C64
⎤
⎦× 4
SE_conv2 63 × 16 ⎡
⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣
3× 3, 152, stride1
3× 3, 152, stride1
[averagepool2× 2, stride2]
1× 1, 152, stride1
SEblock, C64
⎤
⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦
× 5
SE_conv3 32 × 8 ⎡
⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣
1× 1, 304, stride1
3× 3, 304, stride1
1× 1, 1216, stride1
[averagepool2× 2, stride2]
1× 1, 1216, stride1
SEblock, C152
⎤
⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦
× 18
Conv2 16 × 4 ⎡
⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣
1× 1, 608, stride1
3× 3, 608, stride1
1× 1, 2432, stride1
[averagepool2× 2, stride2]
1× 1, 2432, stride1
⎤
⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦
× 3
SE block 16 × 4 C 152
Global average pool, FC, sigmoid 1 × 3 ​
Table C2 
Model Training Parameters.
parameter name value
MTDs train set 26,831
valid set 5,748
test set 5,756
Mel_spectrogram sample rate 32000 Hz
frame length 1024
hop length 320
FFT size 1024
Mel bins 128
spectral bandwidth [0, 14000] Hz
ASL loss γ_neg 6
γ_pos 0
model training batch size 32
epoch 80
learning rate 1e-4
Table C3 
Architecture of baseline models.
ResNet50 ResNet50-A TResNet-M TResNet-MA TResNet-L
Input size 500 × 128
Conv 7 × 7, 64, stride 2 Space to depth, block size 4
Max pool 3 × 3, stride 2 Conv 3 × 3, 76, stride 2⎡
⎣
conv1× 1, 64
conv3× 3, 64
conv1× 1, 256
⎤
⎦× 3
⎡
⎣
conv1× 1, 64
conv3× 3, 64
conv1× 1, 256
⎤
⎦× 3
[
conv3× 3, 76
conv3× 3, 76
]
× 3
⎡
⎣
conv3× 3, 76
conv3× 3, 76
SEblock, C64
⎤
⎦× 3
[
conv3× 3, 76
conv3× 3, 76
]
× 4
⎡
⎣
conv1× 1, 128
conv3× 3, 128
conv1× 1, 512
⎤
⎦× 4
⎡
⎣
conv1× 1, 128
conv3× 3, 128
conv1× 1, 512
⎤
⎦× 4
⎡
⎢⎢⎣
conv3× 3, 152
conv3× 3, 152
[average pool 2× 2]
conv1× 1, 152
⎤
⎥⎥⎦× 4
⎡
⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣
conv3× 3, 152
conv3× 3, 152
[average pool 2× 2]
conv1× 1, 152
SEblock, C64
⎤
⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦
× 4
⎡
⎢⎢⎣
conv3× 3, 152
conv3× 3, 152
[average pool 2× 2]
conv1× 1, 152
⎤
⎥⎥⎦× 5
⎡
⎣
conv1× 1, 256
conv3× 3, 256
conv1× 1, 1024
⎤
⎦× 6
⎡
⎣
conv1× 1, 256
conv3× 3, 256
conv1× 1, 1024
⎤
⎦× 6
⎡
⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣
conv1× 1, 304
conv3× 3, 304
conv1× 1, 1216
[average pool 2× 2]
conv1× 1, 1216
⎤
⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦
× 11
⎡
⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣
conv1× 1, 304
conv3× 3, 304
conv1× 1, 1216
[average pool 2× 2]
conv1× 1, 1216
SEblock, C152
⎤
⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦
× 11
⎡
⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣
conv1× 1, 304
conv3× 3, 304
conv1× 1, 1216
[average pool 2× 2]
conv1× 1, 1216
⎤
⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦
× 18
(continued on next page)
L. Chen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Expert Systems With Applications 296 (2026) 129122 
21 

Table C3 (continued)
ResNet50 ResNet50-A TResNet-M TResNet-MA TResNet-L
⎡
⎣
conv1× 1, 512
conv3× 3, 512
conv1× 1, 2048
⎤
⎦× 3
⎡
⎣
conv1× 1, 512
conv3× 3, 512
conv1× 1, 2048
⎤
⎦× 3SE block, C 128
⎡
⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣
conv1× 1, 608
conv3× 3, 608
conv1× 1, 2432
[average pool 2× 2]
conv1× 1, 2432
⎤
⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦
× 3
⎡
⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣
conv1× 1, 608
conv3× 3, 608
conv1× 1, 2432
[average pool 2× 2]
conv1× 1, 2432
⎤
⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦
× 3SE block, C 152
⎡
⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣
conv1× 1, 608
conv3× 3, 608
conv1× 1, 2432
[average pool 2× 2]
conv1× 1, 2432
⎤
⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦
× 3
Average pool, FC, sigmoid 
output size 1 × 3
Appendix D 
Appex
D.1 MTD based on DeepShip
The three distinct target signal classes selected from the DeepShip dataset are cargo (CG), passenger ship (PS), and tanker (TK), along with one class 
of non-target interference (tug, denoted as NTInf). The signals were sampled at 32 kHz with a duration of 5 s. The process of constructing the mixed 
signal dataset with non-target interference based on the DeepShip dataset follows a procedure similar to that of ShipsEar, as detailed in Algorithm 1. 
The resulting mixed target dataset (MTD) is referred to as DS. Detailed information about the DS is provided in Tables D.1 and D.2, as well as Fig. D.1. 
The recognition results are summarized in Table D.3 and Fig. D.2.
Fig. D.1 shows that the TIR distribution of the MTD constructed from the raw DeepShip signals follows an approximately normal distribution, 
similar to the SE_raw and SE_norm MTDs. This observation aligns with our expectations for multi-target signals collected from real underwater 
acoustic environments. Therefore, at the current stage of validating the effectiveness and feasibility of the proposed method, we temporarily assume 
this distribution reflects real-world conditions.
Table D1 
TIR ranges and signal labels of underwater acoustic MTDs with interference.
Signal Type TIR Label Training Samples validation samples test samples
CG PF / NTInf [–33, 44] [1, 0, 0] 4543 973 973
PS MB / NTInf [-34, 41] [0, 1, 0] 5163 1106 1106
TK RV / NTInf [-28, 42] [0, 0, 1] 6101 1307 1307
CG + PS PF / NTInf 
MB / NTInf
[–33, 43] 
[–33, 49]
[1, 1, 0] 5599 1199 1199
CG + TK PF / NTInf 
RV / NTInf
[-27, 40] 
[-34, 42]
[1, 0, 1] 5600 1200 1200
PS + TK MB / NTInf 
RV / NTInf
[–32, 45] 
[-30, 41]
[0, 1, 1] 5600 1200 1200
CG + PS + TK PF / NTInf 
MB / NTInf 
RV / NTInf
[-34, 37] 
[–33, 46] 
[-30, 38]
[1, 1, 1] 5600 1200 1200
NTInf / / [0, 0, 0] 4818 1032 1033
Fig. D1. TIR Distribution of MTD Based on DeepShip.
As shown in Table D.1, the sample quantities for each class and the MTD balance metrics in Table D.2 indicate that the MTD constructed from the 
DeepShip dataset has a high class and label balance. As a result, no resampling procedures were applied to this dataset in this study.
L. Chen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Expert Systems With Applications 296 (2026) 129122 
22 

Table D2 
Comparison of MTD properties.
LCard MeanIR CVIR MeanImR CVImR LP_MeanIR LP_CVIR
DS 1.73 1.04 0.04 1.37 0.08 1.13 0.10
DS_trainset 1.73 1.04 0.04 1.37 0.09 1.13 0.10
D.2 Recognition results
Table D.3 presents the recognition results of the TResNet-LA model on the DeepShip-based MTD dataset. The first three rows show the recognition 
performance for the three target classes, while the last row summarizes the overall performance.
As shown in Table D.3, the model achieves highly similar recognition performance across the three target classes, with accuracy exceeding 77 % for 
all. In terms of precision, recall, and F1-score, the TK class performs slightly better than the other two. Additionally, all three classes achieve mAP 
scores above 86 %, with the PS class reaching the highest at 88.68 %.
The last row presents the overall recognition performance, with a global accuracy of 50.36 %. This result suggests that more than half of the 
samples were correctly recognized in both target type and quantity. Nevertheless, as shown in Fig. D.2, the model achieves almost perfect accuracy for 
the NTInf class but struggles to fully recognize both the type and quantity of samples containing targets. Specifically, the model tends to overestimate 
the number of targets, often misrecognizing samples containing one target as having two and those containing two targets as having three. This 
observation is consistent with the results presented in Section 5.2, where the model exhibited similar tendencies on the SE_raw and SE_norm MTDs.
Overall, the model demonstrates relatively consistent performance across the three target classes, with comparable values across all metrics. This 
result indicates that the model has a balanced recognition capability for different target classes, further validating its generalization ability across 
different datasets. In future work, we will continue to refine our method to enhance the model’s recognition performance in complex interference 
scenarios.
Table D3 
Recognition results of non-target interfered MTD based on DeepShip.
global_acc accuracy precision recall F1-score mAP
CG / 77.08 76.12 78.39 77.24 86.15
PS / 78.03 78.12 79.1 78.61 88.68
TK / 77.53 78.24 80.01 79.12 88.46
overall 50.36 77.55 77.49 79.17 78.32 87.76
Fig. D2. Confusion matrix on test set.
L. Chen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Expert Systems With Applications 296 (2026) 129122 
23 

Appendix E 
Appex
Table D1 
Global recognition metrics of non-target interfered MTDs under various TIRs.
Accuracy precision recall F1-score
SE_raw 49.69 36.08 36.59 35.97
SE_norm 68.16 53.29 52.99 52.80
SE_en0 91.38 88.22 84.74 86.34
Data availability
Data will be made available on request.
References
Aghdam, G., Reza, M., Azhdari, H., Majid, S., Mohammad, K., & Mohammad, K. (2023). 
Feature Extraction from Passive Sonar Data based on the Combination of Cepstrum 
and Short-Time Fourier Transform. Imam Khomeini University of Marine Sciences, 27 
(105), 1–10.
Alouani, Z., Hmamouche, Y., Khamlichi, B. E., & Seghrouchni, A. E. F. (2022). A Spatio- 
temporal Deep Learning Approach for Underwater Acoustic Signals Classification. In 
2022 18th IEEE International Conference on Advanced Video and Signal Based 
Surveillance (AVSS) (pp. 1–7). https://doi.org/10.1109/AVSS56176.2022.9959247
Aslam, M. A., Zhang, L., Liu, X., Irfan, M., Xu, Y., Li, N., Zhang, P., Jiangbin, Z., & 
Yaan, L. (2024). Underwater sound classification using learning based methods: A 
review. Expert Syst. Appl., 255, Article 124498. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
eswa.2024.124498
Bianco, M. J., Gerstoft, P., Traer, J., Bianco, M. J., Gerstoft, P., Traer, J., Ozanich, E., 
Roch, M. A., Gannot, S., & Deledalle, C.-A. (2019). Machine learning in acoustics: 
Theory and applications. J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 146(5), 3590–3628. https://doi.org/ 
10.1121/1.5133944
Borchani, H., Bielza, C., Toro, C., & Larra˜naga, P. (2013). Predicting human 
immunodeficiency virus inhibitors using multi-dimensional Bayesian network 
classifiers. Artif. Intell. Med., 57(3), 219–229. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
artmed.2012.12.005
Charte, F., & Rivera, A. (2013). A first Approach to Deal with Imbalance in Multi-label 
Datasets. In Lecture Notes in Computer Science. International Conference on Hybrid 
Artificial Intelligence Systems. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-40846-5_16
Charte, F., Rivera, A. J., del Jesus, M. J., & Herrera, F. (2015). Addressing imbalance in 
multilabel classification: Measures and random resampling algorithms. 
Neurocomputing, 163, 3–16. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neucom.2014.08.091
Chen, J., Han, B., Ma, X., & Zhang, J. (2021). Underwater Target Recognition based on 
Multi-Decision LOFAR Spectrum Enhancement: A Deep-Learning Approach. Future 
Internet, 13(10), 265. https://doi.org/10.3390/fi13100265
Chen, J., Liu, C., Xie, J., An, J., & Huang, N. (2022). Time-Frequency Mask Aware Bi- 
directional LSTM: A Deep Learning Approach for Underwater Acoustic Signal Separation 
(No. arXiv:2202.04405). arXiv. http://arxiv.org/abs/2202.04405.
Cheng, W., & Hüllermeier, E. (2009). Combining instance-based learning and logistic 
regression for multilabel classification. Mach. Learn., 76, 211–225. https://doi.org/ 
10.1007/s10994-009-5127-5
Chu, X., Duan, H., Wen, Z., Xu, L., Hu, R., & Xiang, W. (2025). Union-Domain Knowledge 
Distillation for Underwater Acoustic Target Recognition. IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote 
Sens., 63, 1–16. https://doi.org/10.1109/TGRS.2025.3539476
Clare, A., & King, R. D. (2001). Knowledge Discovery in Multi-label Phenotype Data. In L. 
De Raedt & A. Siebes (Eds.), Principles of Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery (pp. 
42–53). Springer. doi: 10.1007/3-540-44794-6_4.
Davis, S., & Mermelstein, P. (1980). Comparison of parametric representations for 
monosyllabic word recognition in continuously spoken sentences. IEEE Trans. Acoust. 
Speech Signal Process., 28(4), 357–366. https://doi.org/10.1109/ 
TASSP.1980.1163420
Duan, J., Gu, Y., Yu, H., Yang, X., & Gao, S. (2024). ECC ++: An algorithm family based 
on ensemble of classifier chains for classifying imbalanced multi-label data. Expert 
Syst. Appl., 236, Article 121366. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2023.121366
Elisseeff, A., & Weston, J. (2001). A kernel method for multi-labelled classification. 
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 14. https://proceedings.neurips. 
cc/paper/2001/hash/39dcaf7a053dc372fbc391d4e6b5d693-Abstract.html.
Everingham, M., Van Gool, L., Williams, C. K. I., Winn, J., & Zisserman, A. (2010). The 
Pascal Visual Object classes (VOC) Challenge. Int. J. Comput. Vis., 88(2), 303–338. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11263-009-0275-4
Feng, H., Chen, X., Wang, R., Wang, H., Yao, H., & Wu, F. (2024). Underwater acoustic 
target recognition method based on WA-DS decision fusion. Appl. Acoust., 217, 
Article 109851. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apacoust.2024.109851
Feng, S., Ma, S., Zhu, X., & Yan, M. (2024). Artificial Intelligence-based Underwater 
Acoustic Target Recognition: A Survey. Remote Sens. (Basel), 16(17). https://doi. 
org/10.3390/rs16173333
Feng, S., & Zhu, X. (2022). A Transformer-based Deep Learning Network for Underwater 
Acoustic Target Recognition. IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett., 19, 1–5. https://doi. 
org/10.1109/LGRS.2022.3201396
Filho, E., Santos, A., Sinezio, H., Filho, E., Fernandes, A., & Seixas, J. (2022). Empirical 
Mode Decomposition: Theory and applications in Underwater Acoustics. Journal of 
Communication and Information Systems, 37(1), 145. https://doi.org/10.14209/ 
jcis.2022.16
Fırat, U., & Akgül, T. (2018). Compressive Sensing for Detecting Ships With Second- 
Order Cyclostationary Signatures. IEEE Journal of Oceanic Engineering, 43(4), 
1086–1098. IEEE Journal of Oceanic Engineering. doi: 10.1109/JOE.2017.2740698.
Fu, B., Nie, J., Wei, W., & Zhang, L. (2025). Constructing a Multi-Modal based 
Underwater Acoustic Target Recognition Method with a Pre-trained Language-Audio 
Model. IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., 63, 1–14. https://doi.org/10.1109/ 
TGRS.2024.3515171
Fürnkranz, J., Hüllermeier, E., Mencía, E. L., & Brinker, K. (2008). Multilabel 
classification via calibrated label ranking. Mach. Learn., 73, 133–153. https://doi. 
org/10.1007/s10994-008-5064-8
Gil-Begue, S., Bielza, C., & Larra˜naga, P. (2021). Multi-dimensional Bayesian network 
classifiers: A survey. Artif. Intell. Rev., 54(1), 519–559. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
s10462-020-09858-x
Guo, Y., & Schuurmans, D. (2011). Adaptive Large Margin Training for Multilabel 
Classification. Proceedings of the Twenty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 
25, 374–379. https://doi.org/10.1609/aaai.v25i1.7895
He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S., & Sun, J. (2016). Deep Residual Learning for image 
Recognition. IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 
2016, 770–778. https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2016.90
Hong, F., Liu, C., Guo, L., Chen, F., & Feng, H. (2021). Underwater Acoustic Target 
Recognition with a Residual Network and the Optimized Feature Extraction Method. 
Appl. Sci., 11(4), 1442. https://doi.org/10.3390/app11041442
Hu, J., Shen, L., & Sun, G. (2018). Squeeze-and-Excitation Networks. 2018 IEEE/CVF 
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. 2018 IEEE/CVF Conference on 
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition.
Irfan, M., Jiangbin, Z., Ali, S., Iqbal, M., Masood, Z., & Hamid, U. (2021). DeepShip: An 
underwater acoustic benchmark dataset and a separable convolution based 
autoencoder for classification. Expert Syst. Appl., 183, Article 115270. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.eswa.2021.115270
Ji, S., Tang, L., Yu, S., & Ye, J. (2008). Extracting shared subspace for multi-label 
classification. In Proceedings of the 14th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on 
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (pp. 381–389). https://doi.org/10.1145/ 
1401890.1401939
Jia, H., Khishe, M., Mohammadi, M., & Rashidi, S. (2022). Deep cepstrum-wavelet 
autoencoder: A novel intelligent sonar classifier. Expert Syst. Appl., 202, Article 
117295. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2022.117295
Jiang, J., Wu, Z., Lu, J., Huang, M., & Xiao, Z. (2021). Interpretable features for 
underwater acoustic target recognition. Measurement, 173, Article 108586. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.measurement.2020.108586
Jin, A., & Zeng, X. (2023). A Novel Deep Learning Method for Underwater Target 
Recognition based on Res-Dense Convolutional Neural Network with attention 
Mechanism. Journal of Marine Science and Engineering, 11(1), 69. https://doi.org/ 
10.3390/jmse11010069
Jin, S.-Y., Su, Y., Ma, C.-Y., Fan, Y.-X., & Tao, Z.-Y. (2025). Hierarchical feature 
extraction of intrinsic modes for ship-radiated noise classification. Ocean Eng., 326, 
Article 120878. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.oceaneng.2025.120878
Ke, X., Yuan, F., & Cheng, E. (2018). Underwater Acoustic Target Recognition based on 
Supervised Feature-Separation Algorithm. Sensors, 18(12). https://doi.org/10.3390/ 
s18124318
Khishe, M., Mosavi *, M. R., & Safarpour, B. (2021). Extraction of Desirable Perceptual 
Domain Properties Improved by the Whale Optimization Algorithm to Detect 
Underwater Acoustic Targets. Marine Technology, 8(3), 11–24. https://www. 
magiran.com/paper/2365673/extraction-of-desirable-perceptual-domain- 
properties-improved-by-the-whale-optimization-algorithm-to-detect-underwater- 
acoustic-targets$?lang=en.
Khishe, M., & Mosavi, M. R. (2020). Classification of underwater acoustical dataset using 
neural network trained by Chimp Optimization Algorithm. Appl. Acoust., 157, Article 
107005. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apacoust.2019.107005
Law, A., & Ghosh, A. (2022). Multi-Label Classification Using Binary Tree of Classifiers. 
IEEE Transactions on Emerging Topics in Computational Intelligence, 6(3), 677–689. 
L. Chen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Expert Systems With Applications 296 (2026) 129122 
24 

IEEE Transactions on Emerging Topics in Computational Intelligence. doi: 10.1109/ 
TETCI.2021.3075717.
Li, G., Bu, W., & Yang, H. (2024). Noise reduction method for ship radiated noise signal 
based on modified uniform phase empirical mode decomposition. Measurement, 227, 
Article 114193. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.measurement.2024.114193
Lian, Z., Xu, K., Wan, J., Li, G., & Chen, Y. (2017). Underwater acoustic target 
recognition based on Gammatone filterbank and instantaneous frequency. In 2017 
IEEE 9th International Conference on Communication Software and Networks (ICCSN) 
(pp. 1207–1211). https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCSN.2017.8230302
Lin, B., Gao, L., Zhu, P., Zhang, Y., & Huang, Y. (2024). An Underwater Acoustic Target 
Recognition Method based on Iterative Short-Time Fourier Transform. IEEE Sens. J., 
24(16), 26199–26210. https://doi.org/10.1109/JSEN.2024.3424500
Liu, B., Blekas, K., & Tsoumakas, G. (2022). Multi-label sampling based on local label 
imbalance. Pattern Recogn., 122, Article 108294. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
patcog.2021.108294
Liu, F., Shen, T., Luo, Z., Zhao, D., & Guo, S. (2021). Underwater target recognition using 
convolutional recurrent neural networks with 3-D Mel-spectrogram and data 
augmentation. Appl. Acoust., 178, Article 107989. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
apacoust.2021.107989
Liu, H., Wu, X., & Zhang, S. (2016). Neighbor selection for multilabel classification. 
Neurocomputing, 182, 187–196. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neucom.2015.12.035
Ma, Y., Liu, M., Zhang, Y., Zhang, B., Xu, K., Zou, B., & Huang, Z. (2022). Imbalanced 
Underwater Acoustic Target Recognition with Trigonometric loss and attention 
Mechanism Convolutional Network. Remote Sens. (Basel), 14(16), 4103. https://doi. 
org/10.3390/rs14164103
Maryam, K., Hamed, A., Khishe, H., Mahmoodzadeh, M., & Azar, M. (2022). Variable- 
length deep convolutional neural networks by internet protocol chimp optimization 
algorithm for underwater micro-target classification. Iranian Journal of Marine 
Technology, 9(4), 1–18.
Neupane, D., & Seok, J. (2020). A Review on Deep Learning-based Approaches for 
Automatic Sonar Target Recognition. Electronics, 9(11), 1972. https://doi.org/ 
10.3390/electronics9111972
Park, D. S., Chan, W., Zhang, Y., Chiu, C.-C., Zoph, B., Cubuk, E. D., & Le, Q. V. (2019). 
SpecAugment: A simple Data Augmentation Method for Automatic Speech 
Recognition. Interspeech, 2019, 2613–2617. https://doi.org/10.21437/ 
Interspeech.2019-2680
Qiao, W., Khishe, M., & Ravakhah, S. (2021). Underwater targets classification using 
local wavelet acoustic pattern and Multi-Layer Perceptron neural network optimized 
by modified Whale Optimization Algorithm. Ocean Eng., 219, Article 108415. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.oceaneng.2020.108415
Rajan, R., Deepa, B., & Bhai, D. S. (2016). Cyclostationarity based Sonar Signal 
Processing. Procedia Comput. Sci., 93, 683–689. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
procs.2016.07.263
Read, J., Pfahringer, B., Holmes, G., & Frank, E. (2011). Classifier chains for multi-label 
classification. Mach. Learn., 25, 333–359. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10994-011- 
5256-5
Sandler, M., Baccash, J., Zhmoginov, A., & Howard, A. (2019). Non-discriminative data or 
weak model? On the relative importance of data and model resolution, arXiv. https://doi. 
org/10.48550/arXiv.1909.03205
Santos-Domínguez, D., Torres-Guijarro, S., Cardenal-L´opez, A., & Pena-Gimenez, A. 
(2016). ShipsEar: An underwater vessel noise database. Appl. Acoust., 113, 64–69. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apacoust.2016.06.008
Shi, X., Chen, Z., Wang, H., Yeung, D.-Y., Wong, W., & Woo, W. (2015). Convolutional 
LSTM Network: A machine learning approach for precipitation nowcasting. 
Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Neural Information Processing 
Systems - Volume 1, 802–810.
Sokolova, M., & Lapalme, G. (2009). A systematic analysis of performance measures for 
classification tasks. Inf. Process. Manag., 45(4), 427–437. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ipm.2009.03.002
Sorower, M. S. (2010). A Literature Survey on Algorithms for Multi-label Learning. 
Oregon State University, 18(1).
Sun, Q., & Wang, K. (2022). Underwater single-channel acoustic signal multitarget 
recognition using convolutional neural networks. J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 151(3), 
2245–2254. https://doi.org/10.1121/10.0009852
Tang, R., Chen, Y., Gao, J., Wang, Y., & Hao, S. (2025). Towards real-time detection of 
underwater target with pruning lightweight deep learning method in side-scan sonar 
images. Neurocomputing, 620, Article 129254. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
neucom.2024.129254
Tsoumakas, G., Katakis, I., & Vlahavas, I. (2010). Mining Multi-label Data. In O. Maimon, 
& L. Rokach (Eds.), Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery Handbook (pp. 667–685). 
US: Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-0-387-09823-4_34. 
Wang, J., Qian, P., Chen, Y., Zhou, S., Li, Z., & Xiao, P. (2025). Adaptive underwater 
acoustic target recognition based on multi-scale residual and attention mechanism. 
Digital Signal Process., 163, Article 105193. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
dsp.2025.105193
Wang, P., & Peng, Y. (2020). Research on Feature Extraction and Recognition Method of 
Underwater Acoustic Target based on Deep Convolutional Network. In 2020 IEEE 
International Conference on Advances in Electrical Engineering and Computer 
Applications(AEECA) (pp. 863–868). https://doi.org/10.1109/ 
AEECA49918.2020.9213504
Wang, X., Meng, J., Liu, Y., Zhan, G., & Tian, Z. (2022). Self-supervised acoustic 
representation learning via acoustic-embedding memory unit modified space 
autoencoder for underwater target recognition. J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 152(5), 2905. 
https://doi.org/10.1121/10.0015138
Wang, X., Zhang, Y., Xiao, Z., & Huang, M. (2023). HIDR: A Hierarchical Independent 
Detection and Recognition strategy for underwater acoustic multi-target recognition. 
Appl. Acoust., 211, Article 109503. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
apacoust.2023.109503
Wu, G., Zheng, R., Tian, Y., & Liu, D. (2020). Joint Ranking SVM and Binary Relevance 
with robust Low-rank learning for multi-label classification. Neural Netw., 122, 
24–39. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neunet.2019.10.002
Xie, Y., Ren, J., & Xu, J. (2022). Adaptive ship-radiated noise recognition with learnable 
fine-grained wavelet transform. Ocean Eng., 265, Article 112626. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.oceaneng.2022.112626
Xu, J., Li, X., Zhang, D., Chen, Y., Peng, Y., & Liu, W. (2025). Enhanced underwater 
acoustic target recognition using parallel dual-branch network with attention 
mechanism. Eng. Appl. Artif. Intel., 158, Article 111603. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
engappai.2025.111603
Yang, S., Jin, A., Zeng, X., Wang, H., Hong, X., & Lei, M. (2024). Underwater acoustic 
target recognition based on sub-band concatenated Mel spectrogram and 
multidomain attention mechanism. Eng. Appl. Artif. Intel., 133, Article 107983. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.engappai.2024.107983
Zhang, M.-L., Li, Y.-K., Yang, H., & Liu, X.-Y. (2022). Towards Class-Imbalance Aware 
Multi-Label Learning. IEEE Transactions on Cybernetics, 52(6), 4459–4471. IEEE 
Transactions on Cybernetics. doi: 10.1109/TCYB.2020.3027509.
Zhang, M.-L., & Zhou, Z.-H. (2014). A Review on Multi-Label Learning Algorithms. IEEE 
Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 26(8), 1819–1837. IEEE 
Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering. doi: 10.1109/TKDE.2013.39.
Zhang, X.-Y., Wang, R., & Wang, D. D. (2023). Multi-Label Oversampling based on 
Borderline. International Conference on Machine Learning and Cybernetics (ICMLC), 
2023, 50–56. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICMLC58545.2023.10328011
Zhu, M., Zhang, X., Jiang, Y., Wang, K., Su, B., & Wang, T. (2023). In Springer Nature (pp. 
728–738). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-99-6187-0_72
Zhu, S., Ji, X., Xu, W., & Gong, Y. (2005). Multi-labelled classification using maximum 
entropy method. In Proceedings of the 28th Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference 
on Research and Development in Information Retrieval (pp. 274–281). https://doi.org/ 
10.1145/1076034.1076082
L. Chen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Expert Systems With Applications 296 (2026) 129122 
25 